Welcome, dear brothers and sisters,
to our program.
Today, we’ll consider
how we can use Bible principles
to make good decisions.
But first, let’s enjoy
some encouraging updates.
We’re pleased to share news
about two recent special conventions.
On the weekend of May 23-25, 2025,
a special convention was held
in Santa Cruz, Bolivia.
This was the largest theocratic event
ever held in Bolivia.
Over 1,900 delegates came
from some 10 countries.
The peak attendance was 19,233,
and 277 got baptized.
Then, on June 13-15,
a special convention
was held in Tiranë, Albania.
The peak attendance
was 8,987,
including nearly 2,000 delegates
from 17 countries.
This was the largest
convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
ever held in Albania,
and 83 were baptized.
What a delight to see
Jehovah’s people sharing together
in pure worship!
These occasions remind us of the words
of Psalm 133:1:
“Look! How good and how pleasant it is
for brothers to dwell together in unity!”
But now let’s discuss
how we as Christians
can make wise decisions
using Bible principles
rather than relying on a list of rules.
Consider this simple illustration:
As children, our parents
gave us rules to keep us safe.
They likely said, “Always hold my hand
when crossing the street.”
Our parents made that rule
to protect us from real danger.
But as we got older,
we no longer needed to hold
Mom or Dad’s hand.
Did the danger go away?
No.
Instead, we learned to look
at the traffic in front of us
and cross the road safely.
After all, it would seem odd
if a healthy, 30-year-old man
still needed to hold
his mother’s hand to cross the street.
Likewise, mature Christians
don’t need a rule for every situation.
Instead, we look at each situation
and consider Bible principles.
If no Bible law is directly involved,
then we use our Bible-trained conscience
to make a good decision.
For example, consider the use
of symbols or customs
that may have roots in false religion.
In our vast organization
that spans 240 lands,
can you imagine how many
different symbols and customs
our brothers encounter?
How can we make good decisions
about the use of a certain symbol or custom?
Well, here are three
basic principles to consider.
(1) Would Jehovah be offended by this?
At 2 Corinthians 6:17,
Jehovah gives us clear direction:
“‘Therefore, get out from among them,
“and separate yourselves,’
“says Jehovah,
‘and quit touching the unclean thing’;
‘and I will take you in.’”
This principle emphasizes
that Christians must stay far away
from any symbol or custom
related to false religion
or spiritism.
(2) How would this affect others
in the congregation?
Romans 14:19 and 21 remind us:
“So, then, let us pursue
the things making for peace
and the things that build one another up.”
“It is best not to eat meat or drink wine
or do anything
over which your brother stumbles.”
Even if a symbol
or custom isn’t wrong in itself,
we need to consider
how others in the congregation might view it.
We would never want our actions
to offend others needlessly.
At the same time,
as mature Christians we respect the right
that others have to make their own decisions
based on their Bible-trained conscience.
(3) How is this symbol or custom
viewed by people
in my culture or community?
The Bible principle at
1 Corinthians 9:20, 21, and 23 is:
“To the Jews I became as a Jew
“in order to gain Jews;
“to those under law I became as under law,
“though I myself am not under law,
“in order to gain those under law.
“To those without law
I became as without law,
“although I am not without law toward God
“but under law toward Christ,
in order to gain those without law.”
“But I do all things
for the sake of the good news,
in order to share it with others.”
The principle here
is that we take into account
how others feel about and view matters.
Knowing how a certain symbol or custom
is viewed in our own country or community
is very important.
Something that is very offensive
in our land or culture
may be viewed as completely innocent
in another land or culture.
Back in 1976,
the Awake!  magazine
posed this important question:
“What should be a Christian’s attitude
“toward shapes and designs
that have at some time or place
“been connected with false religion?
“This question may be involved
“when you choose wallpaper for your home,
“the print on a necktie or dress,
“or jewelry such as
“cuff links, a bracelet
or a necklace to purchase.
“It may even be of concern
regarding the design of lamps or dishes.
“You might wonder, ‘Is this design
somehow connected
with idolatrous worship?’”
Then it offered this key thought:
“Many times a design will change
“in significance
according to location and time.
“A certain shape may have
a particular meaning
“to an observer at one time and place,
“but a different meaning
to an observer elsewhere
or in another age.”
“So the Christian needs to be
primarily concerned about what?
“Not what a certain symbol or design
“possibly meant thousands of years ago
“or how it might be thought of
on the other side of the world,
but what it means now
to most people where he lives.”
The article gave examples
of common symbols
that at one time were associated
with false worship
but no longer have that meaning today.
The examples mentioned
included the heart,
the fleur-de-lis, and the pomegranate.
The article concluded
with this practical advice:
“With so many different designs
“having been used in false worship,
“if a person went to the trouble
and took the time
“he might find an undesirable connection
“with almost every design
he sees around him.
“But why do that?
“Would it not be needlessly upsetting?
“And is that the best use
of one’s time and attention?
“If a particular design or shape
is commonly understood where you live
“to be a religious symbol,
there is good reason to avoid it.
“Or if many people locally
have become especially sensitive
“about some shape or decoration,
“the mature Christian
might choose to shun it
so as to avoid needless disturbance
or stumbling.”
Those are helpful principles, aren’t they?
The same is true with customs.
The way they are viewed
can change over time.
The Awake!  of January 8, 2000,
featured an article entitled
“A Balanced View of Popular Customs.”
It observed:
“Customs have been
profoundly influenced by religion.
“Many, in fact, arose from old superstitions
and non-Biblical religious ideas.”
The article mentioned several examples.
Some of these customs may have had
false religious origins.
Yet, the article noted:
“Over the years, however,
“the religious associations have faded,
“and today these practices and customs
have no religious significance.”
Then it asked: “So, what should a Christian
“primarily be concerned about?
“Although there may be reason
“to examine the origin
of a particular custom,
“in some cases
it is more important to consider
“what the custom means
to people at the time
“and in the place where one now lives.
“If a custom has unscriptural
“or otherwise negative connotations
“during a particular period of the year
“or under certain circumstances,
Christians may wisely decide
to avoid it at that time.”
What are some common examples today?
What about covering your mouth
when yawning?
In ancient times, some people did so
because they thought it would prevent
one’s soul from escaping.
But what about today?
Today, it is commonly viewed
as a way of being polite
and does not have a spiritistic meaning.
What about wedding rings?
Some historians claim
wedding rings have pagan roots.
Yet, today most people
simply view wedding rings
as a sign that the wearer is married.
An example that illustrates
the importance of timing
is string lights.
Many Bethelites here at Warwick
enjoy putting white string lights
on their balconies as decorations
—except during November and December.
Why not then?
Because in this region of the world,
string lights are closely associated
with Christmas,
a false religious holiday.
So our Bethel family
avoids even the appearance
of participating
in that false religious celebration.
Another example
is toasting
or clinking glasses.
For years, Jehovah’s Witnesses
have avoided this practice
because it may have had origins
in false religion.
However, now in most places,
toasting or clinking glasses
no longer has any religious association.
It is viewed simply as a friendly custom.
Therefore, after prayerful consideration,
the Governing Body has concluded
that there is no need to make a rule
regarding toasting and clinking glasses.
Each Christian should use the principles
that we have discussed in this update
and his own Bible-trained conscience
to make a good decision.
What does this mean?
Are we saying that toasting is OK now
at all times and in every situation?
Of course not.
We are simply saying
that there is no need to make a rule.
Each Christian will need
to use Bible principles
to make a good decision in each instance.
Since there are so many different situations
that could arise in the 240 lands
where Jehovah’s people serve,
what a blessing
that Jehovah has given us
these Bible principles!
Let’s briefly review them.
First, and most important,
we love Jehovah
and always want to please him.
So we might ask ourselves,
‘Would Jehovah
be offended by the toast?’
For example, is it associated
with a religious or nationalistic holiday?
Or is it a simple expression or gesture
promoting friendship or health?
Second, we love our brothers and sisters
and would not want
to needlessly offend them.
We respect their feelings
and their conscience.
And third,
because we love
Jehovah and people,
we are sensitive
to how any custom is viewed
in our own local culture or community.
Well, what have we learned?
Jehovah doesn’t burden us
with endless rules.
Instead, he lovingly
provides principles in his Word.
These help us make wise, thoughtful,
and loving decisions
regarding symbols and customs.
We’re also reminded
to respect the conscience of others
and avoid imposing
our personal views on others.
Jehovah has given us freedom,
and we respect the freedom
that others have too.
By applying Bible principles
with love and discernment,
we remain united
and avoid stumbling others.
What is our earnest prayer?
It is just as the apostle Paul expressed
at Ephesians 4:13,
that “we all attain
to the oneness of the faith
“and of the accurate knowledge
of the Son of God,
“to being a full-grown man,
“attaining the measure of stature
that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.”
Brothers and sisters,
please know
that we love you all very much.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting®.